Do you know a single person who would
treat their business the way that people
treat their relationships? The business
would be dead. Love is not a permanent
state of enthusiasm that just exists.
Why you shouting at me?
A stare pel, the most famous
relationship therapist on the planet,
podcaster,
bestselling author, and he had one of
the most head talks of all time.
In order to want sex, it needs to be
worth wanting. So when women don't want
sex, is it really that they have less
desire or is it that they don't have
desire for the sex they have? And this
fear of rejection is one of the most
important emotional vulnerabilities for
many men. It's part of what is so
alluring in porn, which takes care of
three major dilemmas around sex. The
first one is, and this leads to lying
and cheating.
Want to know how I avoid getting to that
place?
People end up in a rut because they're
so lazy, so complacent. If you give the
best of yourself at work and then you
bring the leftovers home, taking out
your phone and not present, slowly your
relationship degrades because the more
he refuses to be present, the more alone
she feels. And the more alone she feels,
the more she tests him to see if you're
really not there for me. It's a figure
eight loop. And whether it's money,
kids, sex, every topic could become part
of the loop. But the quality of your
life is determined by the quality of
your relationships. Without it, we die.
What do we do about it, though?
Well, this is one of the best things I
can offer to people is that
every now and then I meet someone on
this podcast that I classify as a wizard
or witch. And I say that because the
impact they have on me is so profound,
so life-changing, so pivoting in terms
of what I thought I knew
that I look at them like a witch or a
wizard. I just think, how does this
person seem to just know everything?
Esther Pel is one of those people. She's
magic. What she knows about
relationships, love, sex, and everything
in between will both blow your mind,
inspire you, and unlock a bunch of
answers that I think the vast majority
of us are currently looking for. I've
spent 10 years thinking that
relationships are slightly confusing.
They're a bit of a black box. I've
wondered why some people are needy and
others are anxious in relationships. Why
does some people in relationships run
away and others chase them? All of these
answers, these black boxes as it relates
to relationships, love, and sex, Esther
has the answer to. And I can't wait for
you to listen to this episode. It might
just change your life. And before this
episode begins, one favor to ask you.
You probably know what this favor is if
you listen to this podcast frequently.
If you hit the subscribe button on this
podcast, which roughly 58% of you have,
then I promise you we will do everything
in our power to make this show better
and better for you. That's the only
favor I'll ever ask you. Do we have a
deal? Thank you,
[Music]
Esther.
What is the mission you're on? You know,
we spoke before we started recording
about a plethora of different subjects
that you're innately curious about. If
you were to summarize all of those
subjects, what is Esther Pel's mission?
The quality of your life is determined
by the quality of your relationships.
And relationships are often not taken
very seriously as a subject of inquiry.
Why?
Because um in various worlds it has a
certain attitude, right? So in the
easiest one would be in the business
world, relationships have usually been
seen as soft skills, fluff, feminine
skills or feminine concerns. Feminine
concerns you can always hold in high
regard but then disregard in reality.
I think that for so long relationships
were structured,
organized through social order,
religion, communal structures and so
people didn't really have to think about
them so much. They were very very
codified. They still are codified in
most parts of the world. But in our
western world where we have dismantled
all the structures that used to define
relationships,
relationships are going through a
massive transformation, a massive
makeover and um and we don't necessarily
have the skills of how to deal with all
these changes that are literally
happening under our feet. So my mission
is to guide people to help people make
sense of what their relational lives are
about. friendship at work, romantic
relationships, family ties, and to
develop understandings, insights, skills
to be able to handle what is probably in
my mind one of the most important
dimensions of our life. Without it, we
die.
Without it, we die.
Mhm. Oh, we don't die a natural death
necessarily, but you it's a death to the
soul.
You a life without relationships.
I mean there are a few hermits but the
vast majority of us are socially wired.
We exist in relationships. We define
ourselves in relationships. I know who I
am by being with you. I mean who am I
outside of that? It's like you know it's
in the presence of the other that we
discover who we are alone. There's no
there's nothing to bounce off of. And so
I am passionate about the relational
lives of people, the challenges of
relationships in the modern world and as
we enter the 21st century and as
machines are entering to replace people.
I'm interested in how people heal from
broken relationships or from
relationships that broke them.
Um that's the mission. And you've spent
a long time working with people that
want better relationships in a
therapeutic sort of environment as a
therapist, right?
Yes. I I have been a psychotherapist
for more than 40 years.
I'm so compelled. I want to start where
we all start, which is with our
childhood and the role that plays in the
relationships we then go on to have or
not to have. I imagine most of the
couples and people you see you can
understand the way they are today as
adults based on what they experienced
when they were younger or what they
learned
a lot a lot.
But we are not just what happened to us.
We are also who we become.
And sometimes we become on the basis of
what happened to us. And when you ask
people sometimes, what are some of your
most important inner resources?
Those very resources come from some of
the miseries of their childhood too.
So it's not linear. It's not bad leads
to bad.
It's that some absence, some deprivation
can lead to an an acute awareness of
something that makes you become the
exact opposite. It's it's a dynamic
dialogue with your childhood. It's not
just the determinism
the the determinism that your childhood
will determine what's going to happen to
you later. I think that all of us, you
know, I mean this is one of there are
many many frameworks around childhood,
but the one that I wrote about in mating
in captivity was to say that we all need
security and we all also need adventure
or change or freedom. And that some of
us will come out of our childhood
wanting more safety, more protection,
more connection, more grounding. And
some of us will come out of our
childhood wanting more space, more
freedom, more individuality, more
personal expression.
And that doesn't mean it's static. I
mean, the beauty of us is that we are
forever changing creatures and we can
rewrite the story. We can't change the
story as it occurred to us, but we can
change its legacy, its meaning, its
influence in in the most extraordinary
ways.
I mean, how many people have you how
many couples have you sat with?
Thousands.
You must start to see patterns emerging
when you're when you know your two
couple a couple is sat there,
they've got some dysfunction in their
relationships.
The guy or the woman starts saying
describing their childhood and saying
their their parents were never around.
You must start to see some patterns in
how that caused dysfunction and causes
dysfunction later in life. Is there any
patterns that we can use as stereotypes
or hold on to with childhood separation
about
but I wouldn't even call them as
stereotypes. I think there are a lot of
patterns but the pattern is not just
what you bring from your childhood and
how it manifests now. The pattern is
what two people create. That's the
pattern. So a pattern could be okay
let's say I grew up and I felt that I
was left to fend for myself that all of
it was on me that I was taking care of
my younger siblings. I'm thinking of a
recent episode of the of Where Should We
Begin? And you know, when he's absent,
when he doesn't respond to a request,
she doesn't just think, "Oh, he doesn't
want to do what I just asked him to do."
She instantly goes into the, "I'm always
alone. There's never been anybody there
for me. I've always been alone. My life
is never going to change. Why is it
always me who has to do all of this? I
carry the burden." And the pattern is
what she asks that makes him react that
makes her amplify. And it's what I do
that makes you be and do what you do
that makes me be what I do. It's a
figure eight. That's the pattern. And
the more he refuses or to just do it,
let's say, and the more alone she feels
and the more alone she feels and the
more she tests him every time to see if
the next time she asks for something,
he's going to actually respond in kind.
And since he feels the pressure and the
test and he comes from a story that
says, "Nobody's going to tell me what to
do."
That's a dance. So couples have dances
and the dance is how you see one person
trigger or evoke in the other a survival
strategy. His survival strategy is
nobody tells me what to do. And that
survival strategy is going to then
trigger in her the vulnerability of well
if no if you won't do anything I asked
then I'm again alone. And then when that
person feels that alone, her survival
strategy is to go and knock at the door
and see, are you really not there for
me?
The dance between the vulnerability and
the survival strategy is one of the most
common patterns in a relationship. And
what's really essential to understand is
that
what makes the difference is the form.
It is figuring out what is this figure
eight look like in this couple. Not the
specific detail because once you've
noticed the loop,
it doesn't matter what they're talking
about. Every topic could become a part
of the loop. Whether it's money, kids,
sex, in-laws, trips,
it will look alike. If I always think
I'm alone and I can't count on you and I
feel le abandoned and let down, then
that becomes the filter with which I
enter most of these conversations. And
if your thing is nobody pushes me and
nobody imposes their will on me because
I, you know, have been telling my dad
for a long time that he's done being the
boss of me. This is the the filter. So
you look for those filters and then you
begin to see, you know, it's like music.
If you really listen to a sentence from
a music to a phrase, after the first
four notes, you have a good idea of what
are the next four notes.
Mhm.
That's how you do pattern recognition in
couples.
Me and my partner are going through
this. I think at the moment we've
figured out what our figure of eight,
our pattern is,
right? Tell me.
It's exactly what you just said.
Which one?
I'm the guy. She's the woman in the
scenario. So you're the nobody tells me
I'm the monster feels like everything's
threatening my independence,
you know, and my and I don't like to be
told what to do as in
and so you also interpret any request or
invitation as a command
as a threat on my independence.
It's a command which you have to push
back as an intrusion.
Yeah. Like the walls are closing in,
right? as a violation of your
and so you do this.
Yeah.
And when you do that, then
she
she goes comes she uh it's almost like
I'll give you an example. I'll be sat at
home after work. I've come home. It's
maybe 9:00 p.m. I'll quickly throw out
my laptop and I'm doing some work. Um
whatever. She says something to me and
because I'm kind of busy here, I give
like a half acknowledgement and because
I've like not turned away from the
laptop or because I've not given my full
attention, she'll then start like asking
me seemingly completely random questions
that she wouldn't or ordinarily ask me.
What do you think of this? Picking up
something random in the house. Um, what
what do you want to drink? There's
literally a cup of water already in
front of me.
And you know what that does, right? The
more the more.
So the more she starts doing it to me,
the more I can start giving the blunt
responses.
But what it means when you say the more
the more is that we make the other.
You are creating a knocker.
Yeah. Yeah.
And she's creating a withholder.
The more she knocks, the more you
withdraw or withhold. The more you
withdraw half attention. Uhhuh. you
know, artificial intimacy and the more
she experiences you as absent and she
comes looking for you in full force. And
what that says is that we create the
other person. We contribute to making
them the very thing we don't want.
If you wanted her to not do this, you
could change this in a minute.
How?
By basically stopping for a moment
saying this ritual of acknowledging each
other at the end of a long day means a
lot and actually doesn't just mean a lot
to her because you don't have to deal
with it because she makes sure that you
don't get forgotten.
If she would was not coming and she
didn't and she disappeared for six days
in a row and never came to check in with
you, you would begin to wonder what's
going on. So she holds the flame for
you.
Yeah. If you if you stopped actually and
it's 9:00, you've had your long deeds,
but you've been on your own, you've done
all your stuff, and you actually said,
"Come here." And you took literally 30
seconds for a beautiful kiss, a hug, a
gaze, a moment, and then you said, "I'll
be done in probably 20 minutes. I'm
excited to spend some time together."
You would relax her nervous system. She
would not be, you know, after you. and
you would actually feel like your
boundaries have been respected.
But what happens in a couple is that you
want her to change. You want her to stop
annoying you and do what you do. Doesn't
she see that I'm busy? I'm almost done.
You know, why doesn't she wait? And so,
we always think the other will change
and then my life will improve. But if
you actually want your life to change or
your relationship dynamic to change, you
could do it like this because you're the
one who is you and her, right? It's the
same. I would say the exact same thing
to her. By the way, this is so
symmetric. So I would say to her, if you
actually want him to not push you away,
here is what you can do. If you want her
to not keep knocking, then here is what
you can do. Because when you do what you
do, you are increasing her knocking.
I've noticed that
this is fundamental to couples thinking.
It says we are not essential creatures.
We become someone as part of the dynamic
that we are in with another someone.
This is when people begin to understand
that in couples therapy, things begin to
change. It's like a light bulb goes on.
I also really resonate with the sub
point you made that if she stopped
knocking, I'd be like, "What the hell's
going on?" And I' and I'd eventually end
up lonely and unhappy. And you're right,
she is carrying the um as you called it
like the flame for the relationship.
She's the pursuer. Yeah.
You're the distancer. Yeah.
And the distancer doesn't have to deal
with his feelings of longing or desire
for closeness because the other one is
holding up the quota.
Then why do we go do we go for people
that are are opposites in this regard?
No, you go for people who express the
part of you that you don't want to deal
with.
Okay. meaning you're telling me I'm the
person who who's from whom being
intruded upon violated my independence
my independence but we all have needs
for independence and we all have needs
for connection and dependence but those
you have outsourced on her
ah so we is
taking care of the feelings that you are
disavowing or the needs that you are
disavowing inside of you
as to why you felt vice versa
even my finger on top of it.
Was I?
No, I'm joking. I'm joking. No, it's But
it's so true.
Do do you understand 100%.
We outsource. It's not that we find
someone who's the opposite. is we find
it looks like it's the opposite but what
it really is is
we all have needs for that's what I was
saying for for the connection and for
the space of the independence we all
need both
we need home and we need journey we need
predictability and we need innovation we
need commitment and we need freedom we
we need both different degrees but we
need both what happens in a relationship
sometimes is that I assign to you. I
outsource to you the parts of my needs
that I am conflicted about and you are
more conflicted about your dependency
needs which are actually totally normal.
You're much more aware of your
independence needs. That's kind of your
persona and she may be exactly on the
opposite of that. It changes when people
begin to actually integrate the part
that the other one is playing. And this
realization that if she wasn't coming
after you, at some point you would
suddenly say, "Wow,
where is she?" That is basically the
giveaway.
And I know I know this in our
relationship. I think, God, is she cuz
when I'm over here, I'm over here in New
York at the moment and she's in London
doing her retreats and stuff. She's got
like a breath work.com. A breath work
retreat she does. And when she's not
here, not around me, I fall into
I can miss her better.
Yeah. Yeah. 100%.
And also, I fall into really like
I'd say bad
balance habits. I'm out of balance in my
life. I'm I go all in on independence
and work. Right. But when she I've
always referred to her, she's like a
counterbalance in my life because she's
the one that says, "No, we need to go to
the beach for 2 hours.
I would never do that on my own in
valition."
And and I appreciate it so deeply
because I go, "I know what my life looks
like when you're not around." And it is
a unsustainable life. And they often say
opposites attract. I think she's she's
Do you tell her so by the way?
Which part? of how much she balances
you, how appreciative you are of it, how
much you rely on her for that, how out
of kilter you would be when if she
wasn't doing so. Do you actually
acknowledge that
and show her the appreciation for it? Or
is 90% of your speech to her the the
part of the I need my time, my
independence, my this, my that?
It's a very good question. Um,
I would say I don't tell her enough. And
at the same time, if it's possible,
maybe this is a mistake, that she knows.
And I say she knows for two reasons.
Reason one is because there are moments
where I express that gratitude to her.
And number two is because I'm so open
about it in terms of like publicly,
which isn't always the best way to
communicate with someone. Don't tell me
off, but I'm so open about it on this
podcast. talk about and she listens to
it and she listens to it and she she's a
big fan of yours as well and but you're
right in the moment in the heat of the
moment I'm all about defense so I'm like
I can descend into blame a little bit
too much you know
you know I once I I often like to ask
people you know what's the one thing I
said that that stayed with you that made
a difference and um it was a situation
where a person basically was talking
about how um
when they are late, when they miss an
appointment, when they miss an activity
that the couple had agreed upon or a
game of the children or whatever it was,
you know that they make a point of
apologizing.
And I said to them, you know,
if you're still at the computer at 10:00
and you know, and you're apologizing,
that's you consider that being
considerate. I'm aware and I'm
apologizing. But when you apologize
about your absence, what you missed,
what you didn't do, you're basically
still saying, "I'm super important. I'm
that important, but I couldn't be
there." But if you actually said, "I'm
so thankful
that you're here because I could not
have stayed at the office late. I could
not have gone to that last minute
dinner. I could not have gone and so
seen so and so if you were not here."
And instead of apologizing you thank
then you are actually saying I couldn't
do this without you which means I am an
independent person who is completely
interdependent with you
and that interdependence
is the part that the independent person
is struggling with
it's whatever you are doing and this is
when you said she balances me she tells
me let's go to the be whatever you are
doing is bolstered by someone who is
making this possible for you. And that
acknowledgement, it's not just to be
nice and to say thank you. It humbles
you. It says, "I could not do this
without you."
That gives the other person not a sense
that they are superfluous or intrusive
or annoying or choosing the wrong
moment, but that they matter,
that they have a presence and a meaning
in your life. And that is a secret to a
connection.
Making the other person know that they
matter and have meaning in my life.
Yeah. I couldn't do it without you.
I'm having a huge day at business or a
huge day at work and I can do this and I
can stay late and because whatever
you've taken care of 10 different things
that would make it possible for me to
have my mind completely focused. I'm
here I'm with a stair pel you know I'm
talking or whoever all the other guests
are and I can do that because there's
someone there that has taken care of all
of the stuff I don't have to worry
about. And when you acknowledge that and
you thank a person for that, you're
basically saying, "I couldn't do this if
you didn't do that." That's the
interdependence.
Our relationships, you know, I think we
all certainly I think I have for much of
my life. And I say that because I look
at my actions. So what I might say is
different to how I think I've behaved
over the last I don't know 10 10 15
years. We see them as kind of an
afterthought to everything else in many
regards. So, the amount of effort I put
into my businesses and to the podcast
and to every little detail, the
creativity, the thought, the
brainstorming, all of that
relationships, we kind of all just think
they're just they just happen. And if it
doesn't happen perfectly, then it's
broken and I need to find a new one.
Yeah, that's a terrible way to think. I
mean, and everybody knows it. If you
give the best of yourself at work, if
you bring the leftovers home, if when
you come home you say, "I've given
everything I had. Now I'm just putting
my feet on the table. I just need to
chill. I don't want to make any effort."
You know, slowly your relationship
degrades. Period. And then there's all
kinds of ways it ends. None of them are
particularly joyful. And um basically if
people were able to put a little bit of
creativity, attention, attention
into their relationships as they do with
their customers or their guests,
relationships would be doing a lot
better and my profession would be seeing
a lot less people. I mean there's no
doubt.
And why are people so lazy, so
complacent, so unimaginative
with their relationships at home? I
mean, I see so many people when you like
here, you know, you're not taking out
your phone. You're not you're looking at
me, you're paying attention on occasion,
you look for your questions and where we
go, but basically you're you're with me.
But at home, you're if you do this or
this,
looking at my phone,
you know, um and and then when the
person tells you something really
important, you go, "Uh-huh."
Uh-huh. You know, and you're kind of
there but not present. And that's the
beginning of a kind of modern loneliness
actually is that this idea that you can
share something really important to
someone who is half there. Half there.
And I think that that's what's happening
with a lot of younger people these days
is that they experience a lot of half
dareness.
And that begins to cultivate a real
sense of loneliness that has to do not
with I'm physically alone. That has to
do with do I matter? Who hears me? Who
cares? Who pays attention? Who notices?
You know
I I
sometimes the advice is very banal, you
know. It's to tell people, "Put your
freaking phone down. Take an hour and
put your phone down and
but I'm busy."
Huh?
But I'm busy.
Well,
that you will be busy and there won't be
a relationship. Sooner or later, there
won't be a relationship. It's not
difficult. You can wait. You can wait
for the kids to grow up if there are
kids involved things. But in the end, it
it there isn't
just because someone was on their phone.
Well, it's not just the on the phone.
It's on the phone means I am
continuously saying something is more
important than you. We come last. We're
a cactus. We don't need to be watered.
We can survive in a desert.
It's called There's a term I've been
using for this that is I borrow from
something else. It's called ambiguous
loss. Have you ever heard of this term?
Ambiguous loss.
Yeah.
No.
Ambiguous loss is a term that was
developed by a colleague Pauline Boss.
wonderful psychologist when she talked
about what happens when you have some a
parent for example that has Alzheimer
they are physically present but they are
psychologically gone they're emotionally
absent and you can't really mourn them
because they're still physically there
but you're caught in this in between in
this ambiguous loss on the other side
you can have somebody who is deployed
hostage
miscarriage. They are emotionally very
present, but they are physically absent.
In both cases, it's an ambiguous loss.
You can't Are they still there or are
they gone? Who knows? When we live with
this phone thing when we are because
you've been at work, you've been at the
computer, you come home, you think, "Ah,
I'm so happy to finally let go of the
computer." Do you turn on the TV? You
turn on the TV and then you turn on the
phone at the same time. You're watching
here, you're watching there, and there's
a person next to you. And most likely
they often do the same thing in the end,
too. And gradually, you know, there is
less and less of a thread of
conversation, of connection, of joy, of
sex, of intimacy, all of what you know,
that becomes ambiguous loss. Somebody is
there, but they're not really present.
I'm I'm a I'm you know do I is there any
difference between me and the sofa?
It's comfy. It's routine. You sit on me.
But comfy and routine does do not give
us joy or meaning
or relevance
or connection. And that's what we still
seem to want. So it means saying to
people, you know, it's actually not very
very complicated.
What did people do for so centuries?
They took walks.
That's one of the few times you can't
click.
So take a walk. Don't sit. Don't try to
do, you know, take a walk around the
block and just be in motion. Then you're
parallel. You know, it's not face to
face. It's side by side. And you be then
you can talk about the day if you
instead of just saying stop stop stop
stop stop stop stop stop stop stop stop
stop stop stop you just said you know
let's go for a walk it's London but
still you can you can you know and let
you do half an hour walk it will
you'll come back to me and you tell me
what it will do but it it's amazing how
these small interventions that are
playful creative not digging
change the dynamic of the relationship
ship because she is only pursuing you
in part because of how much you are
withdrawing.
You change, she change. If you want to
change the other, change yourself.
Once you understood the figure eight and
how we create the other, you understand
that if you do something else, sooner or
later they do something else, too. So,
if you want to change the other, change
you.
This is part of the question you asked
me right what are some of the essentials
understandings of working with
relational systems. This is true at work
in companies. This is true in intimate
relationship. This is not just for
romantic love. This is foundations of
relational systems
feedback loop it's called in
cybernetics.
So many busy couples can feel the
spark in their relationship waning away
slowly. But
work isn't necessarily the first place
you look. Like pulling out the phone at
dinner isn't necessarily the place
people look because that seems so small.
So they aim at bigger things. They'll
say, I don't know, something bigger. But
do you believe are you saying that you
believe a lot of it much of it often
starts with those small moments of
disconnection where the person basically
ends up becoming the sofa?
The governments call them bids for
connection.
Bids for connection.
Bids.
You know, it's the little things. It's
the the difference between turning
towards someone or turning away. You
know, when you read something, there's a
classic example they give. Do you read
something? Do you actually say, "Hey,
did you read this? Let me send you this
article."
That's a bid for connection. It's not a
big declaration, but it says, "We're in
this together." When I see something
that's interesting that I think you
would like to read as well, I share it
with I'm thinking of you. I know you
exist even if I'm not with you.
Do you know what my partner said to me
something about a year ago and I it
always stayed with me because I thought
that's such a strange thing to say. She
said to me when we were in conflict
resolution, so we were talking about
things. Um she said, "Do you know when I
send you things on Instagram in
Instagram DMs? Like I'll be out here now
in New York." So she'll she'll if she
sees something interesting on Instagram,
she sends it to me.
She goes, "You've stopped acknowledging
it." I used to just like double tap on
it or make a comment back. She goes,
"You've stopped. You stopped
acknowledging it."
And I thought, "Why does that matter?
Why does it like you send me something,
I watch the funny video, I crack on with
my day?"
Because it's like when you receive a
birthday gift, do you think?
Yeah.
When you buy a birthday gift, is it
important to give it?
Yeah.
Okay, that's reason.
I mean,
how would she know that you watched it
if there is no acknowledgement? And the
acknowledgement is not about the video
or the DM. The acknowledgement is we
share something.
Well, it's even worse because it says
seen on Instagram. So, it says that I've
seen it.
Yes. But I but the but the scene that
means that I have seen the video. The
acknowledgment is we are in we are part
of a thread. We're connected. She's
absolutely right. So in that sense when
you people lose the spark it is a lot of
these small details that people say so
much in the beginning you know all the
positive stuff that people lose and it
it's it's actually only more important
with time rather than less important
with time. The the death of a
relationship is when people take each
other for granted. And when you stop
acknowledging those things, it is part
of the mechanisms of taking for granted.
I had a really good friend of mine um
sit with me a couple of weeks ago and
she has been married to a CEO. She's
also a CEO herself and she's just going
through a divorce now. And I sat with
her in America and she said to me, you
know, he was very busy. I was very busy.
We had this kid and I just think I don't
I don't really know what happened along
the way. It just seems like we fell out
of love. And ever since she said that to
me, it made me think that it is often
quite a gradual process, this drifting
apart. And this kid coming into the
picture as well complicates that. What
she said to me was, you know, we we were
both had our businesses to take care of
and then we had the kid as well. So, the
relationship was, I guess, the residual
beneficiary. It got whatever was left
and that's caused this divorce now and
the child is, I guess, going to have to
live in two different homes.
So, I have two two thoughts about this.
You know, the first thing is um this is
the first time in history that the
survival of the family depends on the
happiness of the couple.
If the couple doesn't nurture itself,
there is no family. You don't stay
married because you have to. Women have
an economic independence like in her
case at least to be able to leave. You
have divorce laws. You can go. So the
only thing that holds the couple
together, you don't get excommunicated.
None of it is the relationship quality.
If you don't have that, there is no
family. Here's your child. And the
second thing is when she says we just
fell out of love, that's not the way it
goes. Love is a verb and you conjugate
it actively in many tenses.
It's a practice. If you stop doing all
those things that you're telling me, the
acknowledgements, the the the hellos,
the thank yous, the um the sharing of
the of the of the the videos, etc. All
of that cushioning when that thins out
it means that you have not been
conjugating the verb. Love is not a
permanent state of enthusiasm that just
exists. Do you know a single person who
would treat their business the way that
some people treat their relationships?
The business would be dead.
This is the and every and and you know I
say it with kind of emphatically but I'm
thinking I'm not saying anything
somebody doesn't know. You have you to
take that kind of lazy attitude towards
your shop.
End of story
and therefore end of relationship. But
it's not that it just happened. It's
that they stopped doing, saying,
expressing, showing, feeling, giving,
receiving, sharing. Those are the verbs.
Wanting, imagining, playing,
experiencing, exploring. Those are verbs
that have to do with relationships and
love.
On that first point about this is being
the first time in history where the
health and happiness of the relationship
determined whether the family stayed
together, not the church or some some
other external pressure.
Could this go to explain why people are
having less and less kids as well
because they don't feel as secure as
they once did? I think this a little bit
about my rel because with my partner I
feel like she's said or indirectly said
that she will be she'll feel happy and
safe to have a child when she feels like
more secure in the relationship
and you know imagine once upon a time
the sec you just knew that you were
going to stay with them regardless
and you also knew that if you had sex
you had a good chance of being pregnant.
True. Yeah. That's the first and
foremost big change that took place. So,
and sex was mostly a woman's marital
duty not that long ago. So you know um I
think that
many people the lesser they have the
more children they have because children
becomes an expression of abundance of
care of more hands to help of the riches
of a family. Um people who have less
food have more children.
It's not people who are more insecure or
live in more precarious situations. I
don't think that that is the reason. I
think that there is a certain kind of um
attitude towards not wanting to give up
the comforts of one's life,
the freedom, the comingings and goings
that makes some people not want to have
children. And then there's also the fact
that for a long time you didn't have a
choice. And some people today want to
exercise that choice, you know, but
you're talking about
the love that goes and you asked me
before, you know, one of the subjects
that I'm very interested in in light of
that is conflict. And I called the
course that I just created turning
conflict into connection
because it's easy
to look at your situation and then begin
to see the strife and the arguments and
the bickering and the conflict and to
focus on the conflict. But this conflict
is occurring because there is a fraught
connection. There's a tear in the fabric
of connection.
And that too, if you say to people,
would you run a business that allowed
for that kind of conflict and bickering
to take place? Nobody.
And and yet you normalize it in your
relationship. You think that that's
that's an okay thing. It's like I mean
if I gave you an assignment at the end
of our convers I would say of all the
things we talked about I I would love
for you to choose three things that
you're going to do differently change
and that you know would improve the
relationship. You don't have to go look
very far. You've already listed the half
a dozen and and then you stay with it.
You you you commit yourself to it. You
don't do it contingent on what she does.
You don't say I didn't and she still did
the same. Give it a time and hold
yourself to it. You will see
relationship is not something that
happens out there. It's actually
something that we are very much in
charge of creatively like a business.
And by the way, a business is made up of
relationships as well. Products but
relationships. Leadership is
relationships. It's vision. It's
efficiencies etc. It's operations but it
is also relationships. If those don't
work, you can have the best product.
If I want to be a master in conflict
resolution in my romantic relationships,
man and woman, let's just use that.
Two men, two women, two men, everybody.
Is there any differences between between
the way that genders typically approach
conflict resolution?
Because there's stereotypes, right, that
men don't want to talk and that women
want to talk.
Yes. But when you have two women,
there's often one that doesn't want to
talk as well. Okay.
I think there is gender, there is
culture, there is linguistics, there's a
lot of different things that play
themselves out, but it's not in straight
couples you will attribute certain
things to gender that in other couples
you will attribute to roles.
Okay?
Because the behaviors are not that
different. So we there's a whole um I
think one of the most important thing is
that
instead of asking what are we fighting
about
ask yourself what are we fighting for
like when you go into the bickering
around you know you see I'm busy why are
you bringing up all these stupid
questions now that you what are you
fighting for What she's fighting for is
to connect, to have some time with you,
to have attention, to to not just kind
of go through the day, do everything,
and let this thing kind of die on the
vine.
You know, there are relationships that
are not dead, and there are
relationships that are alive.
Tell me the distinction.
Same as a business. Well, you can be,
you can survive, or you can thrive. You
can survive and go through the motions
or you can be alive, erotic, radiant,
vibrant, vital, creative, curious.
It's those experiences, you know, now we
use eroticism in as a life force, not
just in the sexual sense of the word.
That aliveness
gives you energy for a lot of things
that you do elsewhere.
You would not be here the same way if
she wasn't there.
And
how do you cultivate aliveness? How do
you cultivate the erotic is essential.
So when I say to people, what are you
fighting for? Usually people fight for
about three things. They fight for
trust.
They fight to feel like the the other
person has their back. They fight for
recognition to be valued and they fight
for control. They want to feel that
their needs, their beliefs, their
expectations have priority, too.
Control, trust, recognition. Those are
probably three of the main things people
fight for. But it doesn't look like
that. it looks like they're fighting
over, you know, money or time together
or how often they have sex or, you know,
that kind of stuff. So, that's a big one
about how you deal with conflict. What
is productive conflict and what is
destructive conflict? Because conflict
in itself is intrinsic to all
relationships. People fight. People want
to have equity. They want to have
justice. They want to be heard. They
want to, you know, so it's a useful
thing.
But we all know what fighting looks like
that is not useful
and that is destructive and that harms
you and that you've seen when you are a
kid and that troubles with you for the
rest of your life. So we we know all of
those versions too.
Um and I think that these days we live
in a society that is also more and more
conflict avoidant. We really don't know
how to we have so less much less face to
face with other people.
There's a question that I have loved
asking recently that has to do with
conflict. When you grew up, did you play
freely on the street?
Yeah.
Okay.
Do you know do you don't have kids,
right?
No.
But you have friends with little ones.
Yeah. My my brother has three kids. He's
under the He's only one year older than
me as well.
All right. How much do his kids pay free
play freely on the street?
Um, they don't play freely on the
street.
So, to me, this little piece of
information
is so important because what happens
when you played freely on the street?
You had uncchoreographed, unmonitored,
unscripted free play with other kids
with whom you learned friction, rubbing,
fighting, making up, competing,
collaborating, being jealous, making
alliances, breaking alliances,
recreating. You learned a ton of social
skills and dealing with conflict and
disagreement and reuniting and all of
that. this entire universe of
experimentation that children had gone
and you really don't learn it by playing
games on a screen.
So we find ourselves a little bit
socially atrophied. Then comes a
pandemic and comes the virtualization of
our lives. There's a lot of things come
come coming together here and we are
more and more unable to deal with
conflict and we polarize. People keep
telling you how do you stay connected
with people who disagree with you who
have different points of view, different
politics, different belief systems etc.
So we are conflict avoidant, we lack the
social skills, we are socially atrophied
and we polarize.
And what's the cure?
I mean, I think that a major piece of it
is um and I hope Alpha Generation is
actually showing us a little more of
that is, you know, close the screen and
go outside and play and meet people in
real
in whatever version two groups, sports,
no sports, but it's about it's not about
structure activities. It's about the
happen stance, serendipity, chance.
Chance is an essential piece of our
life. Why is this so important? Because
if everything is controlled, everything
is predictable, every technology is
trying to give you a polished,
friction-free
answer to every problem that you have,
you learn to not tolerate uncertainty.
And if you can't tolerate uncertainty,
you become increasingly more anxious.
And if you become increasingly more
anxious, we're going to talk about the
mental health crisis. And this mental
health crisis doesn't come from nowhere.
It's connected to a whole bunch of
things that are happening in the world
around us. Let your kids go and have
sleepovers.
Connect with other people. Don't just
stay in your little nuclear system.
Are younger generations less resilient
in your view because they didn't get to
play on the street? They are definitely
less able to deal with um
with disagreement, divergences of
opinions, conflict. They polarize, but
so do other pe older people too. There
is definitely more polarization because
it but what they do show is
a lot increased levels of anxiety
um increased levels of all kinds of
other symptomatologies of around mental
health from eating disorders you you
name it that start earlier and earlier
difficulty experimenting making mistakes
not being so perfectionistic not
attributing everything to themselves as
I'm not enough I'm not enough there's
the whole manufactured insecurity going
on. So those things, yes, I think that
you notice it. We notice it, parents
notice it, teachers notice it. You know,
do I I think we could say that there is
less resilience, but I I think that
that's a dangerous statement because
there are plenty of kids who are
extraordinary resilient in very very
challenging circumstances.
I would not want to say younger kids
these days, you know.
But I do think that they struggle with
certain things.
Uncertainty is essential.
You can't innovate without uncertainty.
Without an appetite for it.
Yes.
Yeah.
You need to be able to take risks. You
need to be able to take chances. You
need to be able to try out certain
things. If it instantly becomes, you
know, I'm afraid to fail. I cannot. I
have to know before I even try. I have
to know in advance, etc., etc. We it it
doesn't just affect one individual.
Why did you write this book mating in
captivity? You could have written about
anything but for some reason you felt
compelled enough to take on this subject
of unlocking erotic intelligence. Why?
Why did you write about this
at the time? This book is 17 years ago.
It still lives as if it was yesterday.
Um, I guess that that means it touched
something that had a timelessness to it,
which was really how do we reconcile
the two sets of fundamental human needs
that we have never wanted to reconcile
in one relationship? Our need for
security, safety, predictability,
dependability, and our need for freedom,
exploration, change, risk. They have
traditionally they come from different
sources. They pull us in different
directions and we've rarely really
wanted them to be in one relationship.
Today we want a passionate marriage
or a passionate you know relationship
and those two things have never had to
because they they demand different
ingredients.
So I was very interested in that. What
does it mean that romantic love has
promised us that there is one
relationship in which we can have all of
that?
That was one really reason I was
interested in writing this book because
I thought this is, you know, we used to
have religion to experience belonging
and continuity and identity. And then we
had family for security and economic
support and children and social status.
But now we want the partner to be a best
friend and a trusted confidant and a
passionate lover. And on top of it, I
want you to help me become the best
version of myself. And I'm going to
start calling you a soulmate. Soulmate
used to be the realm of the divine, not
a person. So this is an incredible thing
if we've never expected more from one
relationship and asked one person to
give us what usually an entire village
used to provide. That interested me.
So something must be broken there.
I mean it's just an incredible shift.
It's a unique thing. It's an it's a
grand experiment in our in our life. And
then the third part was sexual. You
know, sexuality went through major
transformations. It went from duty to
desire. It went from, you know, being
inexcraably linked to children to being
now, I mean, if you only have two kids,
you have sex for the long haul for
pleasure and connection. There's no
other reason. So, what does that look
like? And why do people always say that
sexual problems are the consequence of
relationship problems, which is
sometimes true, but in many instances,
sex and intimacy, they are they are a
parallel process. They're not just a
metaphor of each other. And so I thought
I've seen many couples improve their
relationship and it did nothing for the
sex. But I've seen couples who when the
sexuality changes between them, it
transforms the relationship. And so that
demands a deeper understanding of what
is sexuality not what do you do you know
and how often do you do it and how hard
and how often and how how many I mean
the measurable stuff that is you know
sex has had become this thing that you
measure rather than you know where do
you go
inside of you with another what is the
experience like you know what is the
meaning of sex not what is the frequency
of sex and all these questions had not
been discussed much, certainly not in
the field of couples therapy and not in
in the general culture at large. And to
explain that dilemma seemed to have been
something that till today people found
really
there's no an answer by the way. There's
a there's no answer.
No, the book tells you that because
relationship issues are not binaries.
They're not black and white. They're not
problems that you solve. There are
paradoxes that you manage.
The strength of the book is that it
didn't have an answer. The strength of
the book is that it told you you have to
learn to live with some of these
contradictions.
People don't want to hear that. People
want people want to know the two steps
to fix their sexless relationship in 60
seconds.
Yeah. Well, they can they won't find
that with me, but they keep finding
something else with me. See, you want
your freedom. You want your travels. You
want to be here. You want to do your
podcast. You want to do the stuff that
is interesting to you. But you also want
your girlfriend.
You do want both. And you're looking for
how how do I not bring all my passion,
all my energy, my creativity, my erotic
charge, my imagination, my curiosity,
everything to this part of my life. And
I let that other thing dry up. And once
you will find that not it's not so much
a balance it's really you know um a
distribution of your resources you will
experience a very different level of
satisfaction in your life because you
won't half the time be guilty
when you look back through different
cultures then is that true?
Yeah of course it's true because you
said it. So of course it's true.
Not because I said it.
No it's true because everything you say
is true.
Oh no no absolutely not. I'm sound very
confident, but I actually never think
I'm right.
No, but I think you're right. That's
what I'm saying. Um, on this
contradiction point about us expecting
everything from one person,
are you telling me that we just kind of
have to live with the contradiction that
that creates? Because you're right, we
want spontaneity and excitement and you
know all of these kind of erotic
fantasies, but at the same time we want
safety and belonging and familiarity
which seem like a contradiction. Is it
is is it that we just have to live with
the contradiction or are we meant to be
polygamous
and
a bit more I don't know reckless and
have lots of different partners and you
know like some of the people used to
have throughout history and some people
have in different religions
I think it's two separate questions what
yeah one of them is about monogamy and
the other one's about
yeah well
the other one is about how you keep a
relationship ship alive and um that's
that I think we have somewhat addressed
right um it involves doing more things
you the contradiction is
when you stand you know if you really
want to stand it's actually about
constantly moving the weight from one
side to another it's not about
neutralizing the two polarities it's
about playing with these polarities so
there are times of the day or times of
the year or times in your life when you
know you want to bundle and then there
are times when you want to explore and
play and be be creative and curious and
do unusual things so I don't think that
it is inherently impossible to do it in
relation but it demands activity look
every system every relational system
every company straddles stability and
change continuity and innovation if you
don't change, you fossilize and you die.
So will your relationship, so will your
company. If you change all the time and
you're running, spinning, spinning,
spinning, spinning, you will disregulate
and you will be chaotic and you will be
exhausted and you will forget what
you're even running towards. So nature
knows that we continuously straddle
these two polarities. That's what I call
the contradiction, you know. But
monogamy is a different question about
that. It's it has to do with what do we
think are the viable relational
arrangements at this moment?
For whom is this a model that appeals
and um and it has opened up a whole
vista about what does consensual non-
monogamy look like or what does
polyamory look like? for whom is this,
you know, an expression of liberation
and and for whom is this actually rather
torturous? And it's and I think the what
it says to us is that you can't have a
one-sizefits-all. And when it comes to
love relationships, we have usually not
been the most innovative. You know,
family models have changed, but couple
models haven't changed that much.
Romantic. Romantics and realists.
Yes.
You discussed this in chapter one of
your book.
How do you define a romantic?
Romantics are aspirational.
Romantics are live in the realm of the
imagination. They live in the realm of
how do you transcend the limits?
How do you project yourself outside of
the narrowness of your own reality,
boundaries, consciousness, body, etc.
When I say aspirational, idealistic,
um, longing, yearning,
discovery, exploration, unknown, a kind
of an active engagement with the unknown
and and a and a reverence for the
connection. Realists
are more pragmatic. Realists un you know
are basically you know instead of this
is not possible
there must be more they say this is fine
as is. Why should there be more
and um this is a conversation I just
used these two terms because they were
handy. It's not because I had entire
definitions of them but I understood
that in relationship you often have one
person who says why you always want more
and then one person who says but there
is so many possibilities and then the
other person says yes but so many
minefields or landmines.
Do you see a gender difference between
those two? No. typically at all.
No, no,
I think that what makes the gender
difference is the dynamic
as well. I mean um no I I I I refuse to
just
make it a a man women because I see the
dynamic in all couples and there it's
less defined around gender and more
defined around childhood story or or or
gender identification in the broad sense
of the I no
I I mean yes in the you know the classic
old line that you could see in in a
heterocoup is when mister says but it's
like so that is cliche you know
everything's fine and if she was fine
everything would be fine
is speaking a man's strength though
is what
speaking
communicating
about how they feel
is that a strength that
depends how it's said
you know because people think of um
intimacy as verbal communication often
it's one of the things I saw in chapter
three of your book that we
So here's the
I don't buy the thing that men talk
less.
I do think that yes, men are often
uh emptied out from the vocabulary of
emotions by age seven. It's like
siphoned out of them. The socialization
of boys does not really prioritize
an an active engagement with one's
emotional life and one's interiority.
Okay? It's much better to be stoic, to
be fearless, to be competitive, to be,
you know, those kind of values are more.
But when I sit alone with men, it's not
because they don't have a vocabulary
that they don't have the feelings.
And I've been a therapist of many men
for decades for it was actually
something I actively sought. And when
you take your time and you listen and
you support the the expression, things
will come out. and they when they come
out. Here's the thing. When a woman
talks to you many times, you know that
she's already said that to somebody else
that which doesn't diminish it. But when
a man talks to you, you know that he's
hearing himself for the first time
himself. But that's not because that's
what men are. That's because that's what
we make men to be. That's how we
socialize men.
Um, I think that this notion that women
want more connection. Look, you were
asking me about sex before. I think
every gender has been given license to
what needs they're allowed to have
publicly and officially and in what
language they're entitled to talk about
them. So men will not necessarily talk
about the need for tenderness,
connection, care, uh intimacy,
um holding
um be because that is not the vocabulary
that has been assigned to them. So they
will talk about it in the language of
sex.
Women have basically not been given the
license to say what they want sexually.
That is really not what they have been
educated to develop. So they have
learned that they are allowed to speak
about relational needs and wrapped in
their relational needs are all kinds of
other longings for sexual intimacy, for
seduction, for pleasure, for connection.
Every gender is allowed to ask for the
same things but in a different
vocabulary. Men are allowed to talk
about sex. Women are allowed to talk
about intimacy.
But that's not the fact that is not the
same as saying men and women want other
things. Actually, they are more similar
than we think they are. And all research
supports that.
But it's just the socialization is
causing
a different a different uh effect.
Like we like to think that, you know,
men's sexuality, it's autonomous, it's
unprompted, it's spontaneous, they don't
need anything. They're always ready.
They're always looking for an outlet,
you know, as and that, you know, men are
creatures of nature and women are
creatures of meaning. Whereas for her,
it's the context, it's the quality of
the relationship, it's the that elicits
the desire, etc., etc. I mean seriously
on what basis are we saying things like
this? I mean you want to know men have
an a range of very deep emotions that
completely affect how they experience
sex.
You know the rise in um feminism and
equality of the genders in every regard.
Do do you think that has had
implications for
relationships and specifically sex in a
way that you've seen over the last
decade?
Cuz you've been working with thousands
of couples over the last couple of
decades. So, is there any way that
feminism or gender equality has
influenced
sexual dynamics?
I'll tell you why I asked it because one
of the chap chapters in your book from
you know was it 17 years ago or
something talks about how some of
America's best features the belief of
democracy, equality, consensus building,
um compromise, fairness and mutual
tolerance can when carried too
bunctiliously.
I'm so glad you knew what word you'd
written because I had no idea how to say
that word into the bedroom result in
very boring sex. Yes,
sex is not always politically correct.
Sometimes we demonstrate during the day
against the very same things that we
delight at night. If it's playful, if
it's consensual, if it's voluntary,
that feels like a contradiction.
Do you understand? But so do children.
Children play prisoners and children
play firemen and victims and doctors and
patients. Would they understand that
when they play they enter a universe of
as if
nobody wants to be pinned down
and tied up
you know for real
as against their will.
Yeah.
As in a situ, you know,
non-conensually.
Non-consensually and with the mean and
without the meaning that says this is
for pleasure, this is for connection.
This is for surrender. This is for this
very powerful ritual.
You know when kids are tying each other
up because they are the prisoners. They
are not tolerating it because they know
that they are in the realm of play as if
make belief and it gives it the fun and
different meaning. Nobody wants to be
trapped
when it becomes real. You know, if you
play hide and seek, the most amazing
thing is when you're hiding is to know
that somebody's looking for you. But the
minute you begin to wonder, are they
still looking for you? The thrill turns
into terror. This is what happens in sex
too.
You know, you have to it's extremely
important to differentiate when it is
sexual, when it's a form of play, when
it's a particular practice you enjoy and
everything around it is con is coming
together to clarify that. But
are you seeing couples struggling though
with these sort of newly defined gender
roles as it relates to their sex lives
and as we said like feminism and the
equality of the sexes and all? Is it is
it changed anything?
I mean I think that one thing is to talk
about sexual rights
and one thing is to talk about sexual
pleasure and experience. I think you
know I was I was teaching this course
yesterday. I think it's about 97% of
research on desire is about women. What
does that say to you? That says that we
think women have challenges around
desire. Men don't have to be researched
because the assumption is they're always
interested
just if give them an opportunity which
is so not true.
Yeah.
But the science is completely bored into
the bias.
What's the difference though? Why does
it matter whether if if all the
researchers are you getting different
results from men and women?
No, because because yes the the the the
experiences are different. But what it
says is that the science has decided
that women need to be helped around
desire.
Yeah. Yeah.
That that they have hyposexual desire
disorder. You know, today it's that in
the past it was the opposite that we
were researching and that men don't need
to be researched because because men
don't have challenges around desire and
be that is that first of all it leaves
many men unattended to. It puts an
unfair burden onto the women. That is
not about feminism. That is about but
science and political changes and social
changes they are in they intersect with
each other. Have women, you know,
changed fundamentally around the fact
that at least in the west in most
situations hopefully sex is no longer
just a woman's marital duty, but that it
is also about her desire, her pleasure,
their connection together. That is huge.
Yeah. I mean, we first separated sex
from reproduction when we got
contraception. Then we separated
reproduction from sex when we got
artificial ways to conceive. And now we
are separated anatomy from gender. And
those are huge revolutions that change
the way we conceive of the relationship.
You know we used to think sex elderly
people that is the weirdest thing
possible. But when is elderly people
start these days? I mean, we understand
that there is a way to stay intimately,
physically, sensually connected till
till the end of your life.
Are you having more and more couples
come to you? And this is difficult, I
guess, because maybe it's just more
people talking about it now, but are you
having more couples come to you that are
experiencing problems in the bedroom,
sexlessness in their relationships?
Of course. But what does that mean,
sexlessness?
Because you know in a in in a in a
relationship or in a culture where the
woman's experience doesn't really
matter.
There may be sex, but that may be
miserable sex.
Do you think there's a lot of miserable
sex?
Of course. You know, and when women
don't have desire, is it really that
they have less desire or is it that they
don't have desire for the sex they can
have?
In order to want sex, it needs to be sex
that is worth wanting.
Well, my I've said this before, but it's
worth saying now again. My partner
turned around to me one day and said, "I
don't like having sex with you." And I
was shocked. I was like, "This was super
early into our relationship." And as a
very young man, I didn't understand what
that meant. Very emasculated by it. I
thought there some must she must be
broken in some way. There must be some
kind of medical defect. Maybe she needs
some pills or a doctor or something. We
ended up breaking up. We spent a year
apart. She ended up doing some work on
herself. I did a little bit of work on
myself. We got back together
uh and went on a bit of a journey
together to find out what the actual
answer was. And it turns out it wasn't
that she didn't like having sex or
having sex with me. She very much enjoys
sex, but there was a series of
blockages. And I almost describe it like
I thought sex was one language, Spanish.
And it turns out she thought she was
speaking French. And I just assumed
because she wasn't speaking Spanish that
we couldn't have sex basically.
Mhm.
And at some point I started to view it
as maybe there's 10 different languages
or five different languages of sex. And
maybe my job is to learn the language
that she is speaking. And I have to say
and I say this I give this conclusion
because there's a lot of people that are
in that situation right now. I know that
because I'd say at one point about 20%
20 to 40% of my friendship group were.
We have a great sex life. now. Um,
and I say that because I think couples
often think they just can't turn it
around. They think that when one partner
turns and says, "I'm not enjoying this,"
they think it's the other person's
broken.
We managed to turn it around. Um,
it's wonderful.
It's a It's a It It's wonderful. And
what is not said often enough is that
when people are able to change this, it
changes the whole relationship.
Mhm.
That's what I said before. I said you
can change the kitchen, but it won't
change the bedroom. But when you change
the bedroom, it changes the people who
walk into the kitchen.
And it's very very important and and but
it's you need to do things. You you
can't talk about not having sex.
everybody differently. You you it's
difficult to want to have more sex by
talking about not wanting to have sex.
Yeah.
You have to try new things.
And that means you take chances, you
risk, you explore together and when it
doesn't work, you try something else.
And that is what people often find
really challenging. They'd rather take
it as a criticism and then they
defensive and then they counterattack
and then you say to her there's
something wrong with you etc etc. Do you
know what really struggle I struggled
with was that first day when I tried to
initiate sex and then I basically got
rejected
that created this almost anxiety every
going forward. And then there was maybe
about a year not even a year maybe less
than that 6 months where if I if id like
tried to initiate sex I'd be like
rejected and that kind of just totally
turned me off. And it it was even when
we fix the situation, I almost had to do
a lot of work on myself just to cuz then
she starts initiating all the time when
we when we get out of the other end of
the situation when we resolve it. And
then that's basically a problem because
I've learned this habit that she has to
initiate sex now because there was this
periods for 6 months where I was just
rejected all the time. And uh yeah, that
was difficult cuz I tell you I tell you
what, when you've got to get an
erection, the last thing you want to be
doing is thinking and thinking and
thinking, am I going to be rejected? Is
it D does she want to have it to you
know it's the last thing you want to be
thinking.
So this fear of rejection is probably
one of the most important emotional or
sexual vulnerabilities
for many men.
Um it's part of what is so alluring in
porn by the way. You're never rejected
in porn. Shio never says not now. She
always says me too more. more more
and that takes care of one of the very
important sexual vulnerabilities that
many men grapple with. By the way, the
next one would be um you're also never
incompetent.
You never have performance anxiety. It
doesn't matter. Whatever you do, you do
it's for you. So that takes care of the
second vulnerability. And the third one
is that you never have to wonder is she
enjoying it because she only screams and
makes sure that she she lets whoever the
actor is know how phenomenal he is. So
and also you've searched out the fantasy
that you want. So you're getting
absolutely there's no rejection in the
fantasy.
So it's very interesting thing when you
look at what does porn do for many men
is it takes care of three major
emotional dilemmas around sex. It's it's
not that it just takes care of the sex.
It takes care of the vulnerabilities,
the emotional vulnerabilities around
sex. That's a real different way of
understanding when you say to people,
what are you looking at?
Are you not concerned that with
artificial artificial intelligence on
the way in virtual reality that we're
literally if if porn is taking care of
those vulnerabilities that are standing
in the way of many men,
so will bots.
Yeah, exactly.
So will machines ever more so.
A machine I put a headset on. I buy the
machine on the internet, you know,
and then it can talk to me
and I have an augmented reality and they
never say no and they know exactly what
I like and they accompany me everywhere
and I don't have to feel like I want too
much or too little or I'm doing it wrong
or anything. Yeah, absolutely. It's a
fantastic idealistic world in which one
can enter. scary
and understandable.
Especially as people are getting lonier,
they they'll p they'll see that as a
substitute for the real thing. Maybe a
better substitute for the real thing in
some people's minds.
Yes. Those who will seek it out will
want you to will want to believe that it
is
um a good substitute.
You look concerned. I I
it's a world that I don't know yet that
I'm watching. When I say I don't know
yet, I know I know plenty. But I I I
there are things that are changing where
I say I'm excited. This is phenomenal.
And then there are things that are
changing and I'm saying where is this
taking us?
And I'm a lot more cautious.
And this is one of them. When couples do
come to you with sexlessness in their
relationship, I can we have to define
what sexlessness is, but that they
stopped having sex. It's been six months
since they've had sex.
Oh, six months. Why not 16 years?
You've had that.
Six months.
Yes. I mean, when we talk about a block,
some, you know, a a a breach, an impass,
a shutdown, we're not talking months.
And by the way, this is not people. This
is you your best friends and you don't
know.
I asked them and I was shocked.
You know, that's why where should we
begin became so people began to see that
this is not just some others or just
them that it actually is very common.
Um and so sexlessness is not about
frequency though at some point for some
people it means nothing nothing for
years. And then you ask do you still
kiss? Do you hold? Do you touch? Do you
rub skin? Do you is there any
physicality still? Is there affection?
That may not be sexual touch but that is
affectionate touch. So you you you you
really look at a broad you know
definition. And then you ask what what
you know what is it that you would want?
Do you do you are you prepared to take
the chance?
I don't want that.
I don't I want to know how how I get
back from that place, but also I want to
know how I avoid getting to that place.
It's two separate answers. I guess
there's 16 years in no sex. How do we
get back?
So, first and foremost, maybe this is a
place to start. When I think about the
conversations I have about sex with the
people I work with, individuals or
couples, and and I think probably the
best way for you is is to to listen to
it in in the podcast episodes, because
you you you you can hear how how one
begins to have this conversation. It's
that sex is not about a five minute
foreplay that is just in preparation for
the real thing. And the real thing in a
straight couple is penetration and
orgasm and then you know it worked.
That model that in the performance model
of you know with an outcome is so not
what I'm talking about. This is what
couples have had for centuries. People
have had sex. I mean you can do it and
feel nothing. That's not the goal. So I
don't care how often. I'm care about the
quality of the experience that the
connection you have with yourself and
with another. And so it has we talk
about touch. We talk about giving touch
and taking touch. We talk about fantasy
imagination. We talk about how do you
ask for the things that you like. But
that doesn't mean just touch me here,
touch me there. It's how do you
communicate sexually? What is that
translation from Spanish to French? You
know, how do you say to somebody, I
enjoy this, I would enjoy that more? How
do you create a vocabulary that isn't
negative and critical and castrating?
How do you pay attention to how the
other person is responding and not just
say, "Why don't you like this? Everybody
else likes this." That kind of stuff.
So, it's it's very very rich, you know,
and the definition of sex is really way
beyond this. And so you start to ask
people about their their imaginative
life around what excites them around
peak experiences that they have had
around the kind of touch that they enjoy
around what what do you look for in sex?
Is it a communion? Is it a spiritual
union? Is it an a free experience of
being dominated? of being of giving
yourself over to someone, of being
naughty, of not having to be responsible
and take care of other people which you
do the whole day. What do you look for
in sex? Where do you go? What you seek
to express there? These are
conversations the a lot of people, most
people have never had.
Sometimes one person in the relationship
doesn't want to have that conversation,
right? And the other person does.
Then I meet with them alone.
Okay. I'm and because some things need
to be sometimes articulated separately
first. You know what is it? Sometimes it
has to do with smell and body and and
sometimes it has to do with trauma.
Sometimes it has to do with lingering
resentments.
Sometimes it has to do with a
fundamental inequality in the
relationship in which one person expects
and assumes. It it what blocks the sex
can it's a sleuth work. It's you know
it's it's not just it's stopped.
Do sometimes couples say to you in
private that I'm just not attracted to
them anymore.
Of course. And sometimes they say it
flat out to each other too. People say
hurtful things. Yes. And sometimes it's
I I can't believe somebody would be
attracted to me. I don't find myself
attractive. I have been ill or I have
struggled with weight or I have had
addiction issues or I lots the sex
intersects with a lot of things. It
intersects with your health. The vast
majority of couples 55 up
that stop being sexual is actually
because of the men in heterero couples
because the men are often on medication
for diabetes, for blood pressure, for
prostate, for depression and others. And
all these medications have sexual side
effects. If you are a man who basically
has focused your entire sexuality around
your penis and your erections and your
ability to get hard and last and have
autonomous spontaneous erections and
suddenly it doesn't happen and you
suddenly think now I have to ask for
help
you know what kind of a man this is I'm
no longer you know then you give up and
the notion that actually you have an
entire body to make love with and that
his penis doesn't make the decisions.
It's a person who makes decisions for
the penis, that's a very different
story. And that you actually can
experience pleasure in all kinds of
other ways or that you have had all
illnesses with which you have grappled
with. So sex human sexuality is a very
broad topic that evolves in the course
of your life that changes with your
successes with your illnesses with your
children's lives etc. etc. And that is
one of the best things I can offer to
people is that suddenly the conversation
when you say the person doesn't want to
talk about it is because what they've
talked about is that narrow. Why don't
you want to have sex? You never want to
have sex. All you can think about is
sex. That kind of thing. And once you've
actually invited them into a whole other
conversation about what is pleasure for
you, what is connection, what is the
difference between desire and arousal,
what does it mean to start because
you're in the mood versus to start cuz
you're willing.
I've had partners before where I
thought, you know what, if I laid out
the full menu of what I find
pleasurable, they would think I was a
weirdo. Listen, I'm not into anything
extreme. like I'm not into, you know, I
have a very Look at me apologizing. Um
I'd think, oh, they they wouldn't be
into that, so I just won't tell them. Or
it might make them run off, so I won't
tell them. And I think dawned on me a
couple of um maybe about a year ago and
my girlfriend turned around to me and
actually asked me the question for the
first time about like what my fantasies
were and I was like, do I give her the
vanilla menu or do I tell her about the
That's where the card game comes in.
This card game?
Mine? Yes.
This one I have on the floor. It has a
have a whole bunch of sexuality related
questions. And because you're playing,
you know,
it's the pink triangles are the sex
ones.
But in play mode, you can ask this
question about fantasy in a way that is
much less directed.
Yeah. Or loaded.
Loaded, you know, confrontational.
Yeah. it you you and and you know
there's 60 cards on that subject alone
and that creates a very different kind
of conversation and I I really think
that to put it in the context of play
and playfulness
invites a very different kind of
revelation and honesty.
Are you looking?
Yeah. I mean this one says
my guilty pleasure is
Mhm. Give me the stack. They'll they'll
get you.
Quick one. I discovered a product which
has changed my life called 8 Sleep. And
they are now a podcast sponsor. You guys
have probably figured out by now that
I'm pretty obsessed with optimizing my
health and specifically my sleep. And I
think my sleep has been a bit of a
personal revelation for me, the
importance of it and how much it
correlates to how I feel every day, how
creative I am, my mood, and everything
that seems to matter to me. One of the
controllables to have better sleep is
temperature. If the room's too hot, you
won't sleep. Your body needs a certain
temperature to sleep. But not only that,
it needs that temperature to kind of
fluctuate through the night. Starting
cool, getting colder, and then heating
up again, which is a reflection of
nature and how our ancestors would have
lived before central heating and duvys
and air conditioning and all this stuff.
Highly recommend sleep. I've spoken to
the founder. I understand their mission.
I believe in it. They're good people.
This is one of those products where once
you've tried it, you never go back. Go
to eightleep.com/stephven
for exclusive holiday savings and ring
in the most wonderful time of night.
Eightleep currently ships within the UK,
USA, Canada, and select countries in the
EU and Australia. As you'll know, this
podcast is sponsored by Hu.
[Music]
And I have to say, it's moments like
this in my life where I'm extremely busy
and I'm flying all over the place and
I'm recording TV shows and I'm recording
shows in America and here in the UK that
Hule is a necessity in my life. I'm
someone that regardless of external
circumstances or professional demands
wants to stay healthy and nutritionally
complete. And that's exactly where he
fits in my life. So if you're looking to
try Hel for the first time and to get
into it and to join the Hooligan family,
I'd highly recommend you try this out.
The most sensual sexual experience I've
had without having sex.
Oh, that's a good one.
That's a beautiful one.
It'd probably be being in
the shower with my partner,
which is a very vulnerable experience,
but it's there's something quite sensual
about that experience.
Absolutely.
That's the first thing that came to
mind.
And just read a few and then you can
decide. you're flaccid at that point. So
you're not, you know, you're not looking
your best. You're a little bit, you
know,
and because one of the early sensual
experiences that we have is when our
parents or our caregivers wash us.
Oh, okay.
Interesting.
When they wash our head, when they wash
our back, when they rinse off the soap.
I mean there are a lot of imprints in
the best of circumstances
of being washed as one of the most
initial pleasurable sensual without it
being sexual at all.
Mhm.
Little kids you sit in the tub and
somebody puts the water over you and
rinses you. A lie I've told about my sex
life. A fantasy of mine I'm conflicted
about.
I've got a couple. I never forget the
time I was seduced by.
You say that in chapter six. You say as
um
a a lot of your work is to do with
people who have shame and anxiety around
sex as people withdraw from a lover as
they fear being judged or rejected by
what their sort of sexual fantasies are.
That's a piece. But shame and anxiety is
because a lot of people look if it's one
in four women and one in six men have
experiences of unwanted sex or abuse or
violation
or assault as a lot of people carrying a
lot of very negative
experiences,
traumatic experiences around sex. Let's
let's start with that for a minute. So
we don't go in La La Land.
Mhm.
So people carry a lot of shame, a lot of
guilt around this whole dimension of
their being. And then it's a subject
that we often are trained to be silent
about.
And that means that suddenly now as an
adult we have to be able to communicate
about this out of where I did a thing
when I was in London recently and I'm
doing this I'm going to ask this
question again when I go back on tour.
It's extremely powerful. I ask people to
please
let me know if sexuality was central in
their family
growing up. And of course, the vast
majority of people say, "No, it wasn't."
Why? Because we never talked about it. I
never saw my parents being close with
each other or affectionate with each
other. And then you begin and you say,
"But if sex was hidden or obfiscated or
minimized or only hinted at with dirty
jokes, does that make it absent or does
that make it more central?"
And if sex was violated or misused or
abused, does that make it more
peripheral or does that make it more
central? And if there was infidelity in
your family, does that make sex absent
or does that make it more in the end you
have 90% of people telling you sex was
central in my life growing up
and 10% saying no, it wasn't. It flips
the whole thing. Mhm.
And from there you begin to have
conversations about sexuality. You don't
plunge into the sexlessness.
You know, you ask people, "How do you
avoid each other? What's the dance here?
One of you goes to sleep two hours
before the other. You make sure you
pretend you're asleep. You know what?
What is how have you developed this
whole avoidance thing?" Or one person
wants, one person doesn't want, one
person counts the days. just read an
episode recently and literally he would
have wanted sex every day and she is
just out besides herself and and then it
becomes clear that a part of it is
because he needs help to go to sleep but
he doesn't need her necessarily. He can
also take care of himself if he wants
and that he would have a much more
willing partner if she wasn't just you
know an alleviation for him. And
basically they have a system. She
counts. She knows two days is okay. By
the third day it's not. And so she
braces herself. And so she just gets
through it. And you think this is really
not a good situation. Uh and they have a
fantastic relationships and they tell me
this is the only thing that's been an
issue between us. Now they have had four
children. So he waited patiently and he
thought once the kids are a little older
they're going to resume and and they
have not and she is not at all
interested in resuming to that
and he is so rejected but he has no
concept of how much pressure he puts on
you and she does not necessarily
understand how much he would love for
her to enjoy it and to to experience
some of what he loves to experience and
she has no connection that it's a very
powerful episode coming up. It it it
gives you you know they are not sexless
but in some way I could see you know
having sex doesn't make you sex not
sexless.
I took all the most replayed moments
from some of the interviews you'd done
and I looked at those moments. So I went
through all the YouTube interviews
you've done and there's basically the
spikes in conversation are the parts
that people replayed over and over again
and I've got them all written here.
Wow. Like what? I can give them to you
after. People are so compelled when I
tell them that we do that.
The first one was about
cheating, but specifically this idea
that even people in open relationships
cheat as we can't resist what is
forbidden. The situation you were
describing there seems stereotypically
like a situation where the the man would
then go on to cheat because his needs
aren't being met. Why do people cheat?
I mean, I
because we we tend to think it's because
one person isn't getting what they want
or because one person's a bad person or
Look, people cheat for a host of
reasons. Some of them have to do with
the relationship.
A loneliness is probably the biggest
one.
And
I was going to say, oh, the variance
between men and women when they cheat.
Ah, all right. So, the first one is why
do people cheat? The second one is, is
there a difference between infidelity in
men and in women? So, um, let's go.
Let's start with the first thing. Okay.
Um
I mean I put much of this in the state
of affairs in the book because I had
spent 10 years studying affairs and
infidelity.
So when you ask me how many couples,
it's a lot of couples. And um and I
really thought this experience is so
shattering in so many relationships.
There must be another way to understand
it.
It is more complicated than and there's
so much suffering around it. I want to
really delve into this deeper. So people
cheat because they're lonely. They cheat
because they have been sexually
frustrated for so many years. They cheat
because they are resentful. They cheat
for vengeance and vindictiveness. They
cheat because they um need to constantly
be affirmed by anybody that can make
them feel better about themselves. They
cheat for a host of reasons that have to
do with conflict and discontent and
disconnection in their relationship, but
they also sometimes have affairs that
have nothing to do with the
relationship.
And that's what was one of the big
discoveries for me in the book. It was
that sometimes that affairs happen in
happy couples too. And that sometimes
it's not that you want to leave the
person that you are with as much as you
want to leave the person that you have
yourself become.
And it's not that you want to meet
another person as much as you want to
meet another self or other parts of
yourself that have disappeared in your
life.
And that at the heart of affairs you
find betrayal and duplicity and lying
and cheating. But at the heart of
affairs you also find longing
and loss and yearning. And the word that
I heard the most and this brings us
right back to the beginning of our
conversation all over the world. I've
gone to 22 countries on this one.
is that when people would describe their
affairs, they would say how they they
talked I'm not talking about paid sex,
every night sex. I'm talking about
affairs and you know in a more
meaningful sense, but people really
talked about the fact that they felt
alive.
So affairs are erotic plots. They're
they're not just about sex. Actually,
they're about feeling alive
and reconnecting with some with an
essence of something for many people.
But there many different stories around
affairs. For most of history, men have
basically had a practically had a
license to cheat. And it was explained
that they are more nomadic and rors and
concistadors and that they are more
quickly bored and they are in need of
novelty. I mean basically we gave them
all kinds of justifications to explain
you know and to rationalize why it
happens to them and not to women when in
fact it didn't happen to women because
the consequences were far more dire on
women than on men. So we said that when
women cheat it's because they are lonely
and they are in need for intimacy and
you know we de all of these stories have
been kind of rewritten from by now.
The biological consequences of a woman
cheating were she would get pregnant
back in the
that's why she'd get destitute.
Yeah.
She'd lose her children.
She had I mean come on we're talking
till the 70s women didn't have access to
their own bank accounts. On what was she
going to survive? She would be working
with the scarlet letter. She I mean
everything you want. So the consequences
on women women have not necessarily had
different aspirations or fantasies than
men but the women have done what makes
them safe more than what they would
actually what makes them feel good.
I felt like I was alive.
Yeah.
You hear that from people who have
cheated on their partner. Does that then
infer that one of the causes of cheating
is that it felt like the relationship or
us as a three, me, her, or me, him, and
the relationship we're dead
or
Yes. dead. Yes. An affair is often
experienced as an antidote to that kind
of deadness. Yes.
But of course my next sentence would be
if people were to put 10% of the
creative imagination that they put into
their affairs into their marriages or
primary relationships.
those relationships would be doing so
much better
if they put the planning in the
the planning, the attention, the
creativity, the messages, the the hund
texts, the flowers, the the the I mean
the whole thing, the production, you
know, if people were bringing that full
self, so to speak, that creative,
imaginative, effervescent self that they
bring to their lovers, to their
relationship, their relationships would
not be agonizing.
Do we need novelty? Of course we do.
And how do we get 40 years into a
relation? You're almost 40 years into
your relationship, into your marriage.
You give me think once if you're
trapped. You give me
You look like you're trapped.
No, by far not.
How do you keep the novelty 40 years in
doing new things together?
If you do, this is the research of Eli
Finkel in the all or nothing marriage is
that if you do the things that you enjoy
but habitually we like to go to this
cafe, to this mountain, this hike, this
restaurant, this beach, you know that
that breeds a lot of friendship and
warmth and satisfaction. But if you want
to experience desire, it is
wanting something that you don't yet
have. It's exploring something that you
don't yet know. And that means that
couples who do new things together that
involve an element of risk, not because
it's dangerous. New things together
could be a conversation that they've
never had. New things could be
going to a hotel,
something outside of the ordinary, you
know, that you don't do anymore when you
are together for 40 years or 20 years,
whatever it is. It's that that the the
regeneration of new cells, putting
yourself into situations where you are
not predictable to each other. And so
you look suddenly at each other and it's
like what was that like for you and what
was that like for you? And this we know
is one of the elements that creates
aliveness in relationships. I mean that
that is the distinction. Now not
everybody wants that and that's okay
too. Is there a part of when you've been
cheated on that you suddenly value your
partner more? I say that because it it
highlights that someone else was
attracted to them and then presumably
you're kind of seeing them through not
as like Dave who just comes home and
just lays like horizontal.
Yes, that is one of the responses. There
are many different responses but when
you ask people when do you find most
drawn when I can ask you when do you
find yourself most drawn to your
partner? Not just sexually attracted but
most drawn. What would you say
when I one of the one of the times was
when I went and saw her doing her thing
at work? So when I go and see her doing
her thing in the breath work studio,
it's like looking at a completely I
guess a new person in a in some way.
That's right. That's right. And what
would be another one?
When
other people know how be notice how
beautiful she is.
Right. Right. Right. So you've just
basically named two out of the three
most important answers I have heard for
decades now about this one worldwide. By
the way, there's only, you know, I am
most drawn to my partner when I see my
partner in their element.
Oh, interesting.
Passionate about something competent.
And it could be on stage, on a horse, on
a slope, whatever it is, on a piano.
It's when I see my partner as a separate
other person that is already so familiar
but that is yet again somewhat
mysterious, somewhat unknown, somewhat
elusive. And in that moment when they
are radiant and in their element, they
don't need me. She's not pursuing you.
She's doing her thing. And that space
between me and the other is where lies
the erotic elo.
This is the bar none the most important
one. The second one is when people talk
about I'm drawn to my partner when we
reunite, when we've been away from each
other. God,
which is the second one you told me
before when you talked about the other
one.
And the third one is when I see my
partner through the eyes of a third.
And that allows me to see my partner not
just as my partner as Bob, but as a
separate person who other people see
things that I no longer pay so much
attention to.
So, can we create that in our
relationships?
Yeah,
I can go watch her do her thing in her
element. I can create some distance. We
spend time apart. I travel. I do my own
thing. Whatever. And also, I don't know.
I go and ask guys if my girlfriend's
hot.
I mean, you can do it that way, but um,
of course, she needs to have her breath
work.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
There needs to be something that, you
know, it can be breath work. It can be
what she's done with the house, what she
does with with with other careers or or
or with her parents or with her
children. It doesn't have to just be,
you know,
can't it just be lingerie?
Can't it just be like a new
I have rarely heard somebody say that.
And because also I wasn't talking about
I'm attracted to. I asked you what I'm
drawn to.
Okay.
And that drawn to is a very particular
but this answer when I went and I saw
her do her thing
is bar none the number one.
So interesting
and I I mean and the only one by the way
that is gender specific is when women
say when he plays with the kids because
it is not
you know when a woman plays with the
kids it's called motherly. it's not
drawn to and that's the only one that is
gender that is gender different or
specific all the others I I mean I can't
tell you the the breath of different
countries where the same answer there's
something about this thing you know I'm
drawn to is an it's a movement towards
and that movement towards is because
there is an other and that other means
there's a bridge to cross and that
bridge to cross is that erotic energy
and that's what cheating is.
Yes. So, can people experience that in
their own relationship? Yes. But of
course, it demands recreating it. I
mean, you know, we are living twice as
long. Not everybody's going to be
married for 60 years
and we're working from home.
That is recent, but yes, that
Dave sat over there all day and is
Yeah, that was a pillar for a lot of
people
is to see you the whole day doing the
doing your thing. It's uh it it
strengthened the friendship for many
people and it lessened the erotic for
many people,
you know. But I I think that seeing her
do her thing or her saying that to you
or I I I find it a very beautiful answer
because it really says when I see the
other as an other,
it was like meeting her for the first
time. That's what it felt like the first
time I went to one of her breath work
sessions and I I was just kind of hiding
in the corner. I was completely
irrelevant. It was like spying and she's
got all of her, you know, her clients
there. There's 25 of them. They're all
hypnotized so none of them even know I'm
there. She's doing her thing. I'm like,
who is this person? And who are all
these people and what's this place?
Mhm.
And it felt like I was I guess meeting
her for the first time in a in a way.
Um
it's beautiful. And also they have a
different relationship with her. And me
as a partner, we become kind of
encrusted in a certain way of being with
each other. That's why the opening up in
the triangular gaze is so important. How
others see her allow you to see her
differently again. And that is all
generative. Those are all new cells.
I'll read you these most replayed
moments anyway, just so you know them.
And there's I mean, we've got a bigger
list of them, but I just pulled off the
ones that I thought were pertinent. The
things that all erotic couples do have
sexual privacy foreplay is crucial. Have
an erotic space where they abandon their
usual roles, responsibilities, and
desire don't go together. The difference
between men and women cheating um is how
to balance love and desire. And erotic
is being engaged and giving the best of
yourself to your partner. Whereas most
people give their best of their self to
their friends, their colleagues, and
give their partners the leftovers. And
then in our other guest that we had on
that speak about relationships and love,
the five most replayed moments from
those conversations were the best
techniques for dating apps and different
attachment theories. So attachment
theories is very popular.
Um Paul talked about the importance of
longer engagement periods in being
physically but not sexually attracted to
someone. Marissa Pier is about sexless
relationships again and Tracy Cox who
again is been talking about sex
relationships for about 20 years. juicy
[__]
Oh, is what her most replayed moment was
why hot sex stops after 2 years in a
relationship and the only way to keep
going is by swapping in partners
constantly and never finding long-term
happiness. It's a myth that you can keep
hot sex in a long-term relationship
easily.
That's true. You can have it on occasion
here and there if you think about it as
hot like that. That's true. Um, and
that's not necessarily the goal of many
people either. I think, you know, there
are people for whom this is essential in
their life and it it it's the gate that
opens them up to a lot of other
important experiences in their life. And
then there are people for whom this is
not nearly as central. They enjoy it,
but they they don't need it to be hot.
They enjoy the
what is often called maintenance sex.
Erotic couples have a lot of maintenance
sex and on occasion they get suddenly
this really you unusual hot you know
different wow it's been a while out of
nowhere but they have actually a lot of
of maintenance and and they do have an
understanding of not just I'm drawn to
this person who is different from me but
also a person who has their own erotic
interiority of them of their own and
they don't and they are okay with that
they're not threatened by it because
because each of them have thoughts and
fantasies that are not necessarily just
about the relationship. Of course,
how do we conclude
our conversation?
Yeah. Like how do we conclude? We've
talked about relationships, love,
connection, all of these things in
between. Is there a throughine of
advice, a conclusion that would help
people? Maybe something with a that is
actionable, maybe something that feels
somewhat easy or simple, maybe not easy.
We can go back to the things that we
talked about together and about you as
well. I said to you relationships is an
active engagement.
It demands uh risk.
It demands vulnerability and it demands
accountability which we didn't talk
about them as much. Typically when
people are in trouble they want the
other person to change and to do the
work. And I said if you want to change
the other change yourself. Ask yourself,
what can I do that would make it better?
And do it. And don't begin to say, but
why me? And but but you know, just do
your thing because it's ultimately what
you want. Because there is such a thing
called enlightened self-interest.
Do it because it's the relationship you
want. The relationship is the third.
It's exactly the way you said it. So
when you are about to say or do
something, ask yourself what will this
do to the relationship if I do this now
or if I say this now or if I don't say
this now and do things not because they
suit you but because they suit the
relationship because ultimately the
relationship is there to serve you but
it's a back and forth. Love is a verb. I
think it's a very important thing and
that means you you actively do a bunch
of things. I mean it's the same with
food. You know, some people just are
okay eating whatever is in their fridge
and most of the time there's nothing on
the shelf. It's a but some people are
actively searching the right
ingredients. They go to this market, to
this store, they put it together.
There's an art to that. It's an art a
relationship. And that art you can bring
to your love relationship as well. I
think a lot of people end up in a rut
because they're complacent, they're
lazy, they're unimaginative, and they
have a lot of imagination for a lot of
stuff outside but not with their
partner. And then they say, "I'm bored."
Well, then that it didn't, you know, do
something. Um, and and it's amazing how
hard it is for some people to do it. One
of the things I think is really
interesting, imagine instead of the DMs
and stuff, you know, we just had a long
conversation and this evening when you
go and wherever you stay and you just
basically write a letter and you write a
letter to your partner and just say, you
know, I had this woman there today and
we talked about all this stuff and and
it made me think, it made me think about
the first time when we met and I told
her about being there in the background
watching you do this work and and I
realized that it's been a long time
since I watched you do this work and I
probably should show up again because I
don't even know what you've been doing
since I don't do the same thing as five
years ago or however long you are
together can't imagine that you are and
I realize that you know I expect a
certain kind of coziness but then I'm
thinking oh where is the novelty and I
don't pursue the novelty but there is
novelty I have been doing new things you
must have been doing new things why am I
asking you know is novelty important it
is and it's there but I need to go look
for it. And I was talking about the
maintenance sex and I was talking about
the shower and I was talking about so
many moments between us and I just
thought I should share this with you.
When people sit down with themselves and
they start to write, you know, I've been
thinking about us and it's been a long
time since I even said any of these
things. I mean, man, this is like
filling up a tank of gasoline.
Why?
because you say, "I value this and I
value you and I value what we've created
and we matter and it's important and I
cherish it and I adore it and I and I
sometimes don't pay enough attention to
it and I just take it for granted and
and that is not a good thing to do. It's
like food that stays on a shelf for
months on end. Well, it rots
and there's something about something
fresh and it's it bec it it breaks
through the calcification.
It is a lubricant in the full sense of
the word.
Speaking of something fresh, you have an
online course called turning conflict
into connection. We've talked about
connection. We've talked about conflict.
Why did you make this course and who is
this for? This turning conflict into
connection course.
It's a one-hour course. It's very short.
It's eight videos and a fantastic
workbook. And it's for people who kind
of say, I could we keep getting into the
same arguments. It's for people who say,
you know, how do we turn this thing
around? It's for people who say, you
know, we're in a rut and and who are
willing to try things without having to
go to therapy necessarily. So it gives
you a very clear understanding of what's
the difference between what is it
they're fighting about versus what are
you fighting for in terms of what are
the underlying unmet needs. What is the
you know behind every criticism there's
a wish. What is it that you're wishing
for rather than how do you turn what is
called negative sentiment override when
a relationship becomes overly critical
judgmental you know
spiraling
you know how do you turn the tone
around? How do you remember the
foundness for another person etc.
Well, everyone needs that
and that's why I created it because I
think people are lacking the skills.
Therapy is not the only place to do it.
Um I think that we are avoidant in
conflict. We don't have enough of that
free play practice. And I thought God
the thing that I hear so much is people
who are not talking to their friend,
people who are saying this is too
difficult. We shouldn't have. And I
thought before you throw the whole
thing, let's see if you can, you know,
the some of these things are changeable.
Of course, you have to be accountable.
If all you want to tell me is how you
are as a saint and the other is the
villain, we're not going anywhere. So I
thought, let me create a few courses
like this. I've done the conflict. I've
gone one coming out on sex. the things
that I've been talking about that I've
written about and I thought after that
or even the thing you listen to on the
podcast but now I want you to have
something where you can actually do and
practice some some things that I think
will help you.
We have a closing tradition as you know
which is the last guest leaves a
question in this book not knowing who
they're going to be leaving it for.
Okay.
And I don't get to see it until I open
the book. Here we go.
Oh. What is the one piece of advice you
received in the last decade that you
think about most frequently?
I think whenever I'm thinking this way,
the first person that comes up for me is
my father
who was illiterate,
had gone to school for three years, and
who
basically would say to me, "My little
one, do not get impressed by the money,
by the fame, by the education. Look at
the decency.
And I was a hitchhiker for many years as
a young person. I traveled a ton. And
that became the thing I took with me. I
was taken in by the kindness of
strangers in various circumstances who
knew nothing about who I was, who
probably had the most different
political opinions from me you could
imagine, who had never heard about where
Belgian could be, anything. They just
were kind,
decent, caring human beings who shared
whatever little they had, you know, and
sometimes they had no electricity, no
nothing. They just cooked me an entire
meal with a candle next to them. And I
think that that has really stayed with
me. It's it it's look at the decency of
the person and don't get impressed by
the accutraance and the status symbols
and all of that. Um and I really thank
him for that. It it gives you clarity.
It keeps you very grounded.
Um I love the message and I've actually
passed the message on to my own kids as
well.
Esther, thank you so much. It's a
pleasure. Thank you for your brilliance
and um everyone has been hammering me
for many a year on all of my social
media channels in my team in London,
here all over to have this conversation
with you and you exceed all expectations
every single time. You're just a you're
such an incredible human being that um
that I'm so I'm so glad exists because
there's something so special about you
that as I said it's like you can't
replicate that. It's brilliant.
Thank you.
So thank you so much. It's been a
pleasure to meet you. I mean it with
every word of every fiber in my body.
Thank you, Esa.
Thank you very much.
[Music]
As you guys know, I'm an investor in a
company called Zoe and also they sponsor
this podcast and they're one of my
favorite businesses literally of all
time. We're in December now, which is
the season of gifting, the season of
family gatherings and parties. But what
I'll be doing this December is making
sure I double down on my health because
it's this time of year where I think
it's easiest to get distracted and
derailed. And that is where Zoe comes
in. For many years, I thought we all had
the same relationship with food. And now
I know that every single person has a
different relationship with every single
type of food. And knowing the type of
food that you have the best relationship
with, the food that loves you back, can
quite literally change your life. And
that's where a Zoey membership comes in.
So if there was ever a time to become a
Zoey member, it is right now in
December. That rhymes. H should have
been a rapper. So do not wait till the
new year to invest in your health. Use
my discount code CEO10 to get 10% off
your Zoey kit right now. And make sure
you keep that code to yourself. Okay, go
and use it right now.
Do you need a podcast to listen to next?
We've discovered that people who liked
this episode also tend to absolutely
love another recent episode we've done.
So, I've linked that episode in the
description below. I know you'll enjoy
it.
[Music]